Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we're going to learn how to send email through an application.
So, for example, maybe when you create a new post and actually submit it, then the system could send
you an email and say congrats, your new post is up and live.
Or maybe when you first register for your new account on the app, the app sends you a welcome email.
Or maybe when someone follows your account, you get the idea.
There are tons of different instances in which it would be nice if our app could send an email to a
user.
Now, right away, I should mention that the email method that I'm going to recommend in this lesson
is a very hands off approach, meaning I'm not going to try and configure our server or the hosting
environment to actually send the emails.
Instead, I'm going to use a third party service that is completely devoted and dedicated to sending
email.
I'm a big fan of this approach for several reasons.
Reason number one is it's going to work even if our application moves from different hosting companies.
And it's also going to seamlessly work whether we're testing on our local personal computer or if we're
testing on our production server.
In other words, there's no server configuration settings to experiment with and troubleshoot.
This solution just works right out of the box.
Also, I don't believe Hiroku allows you to send email directly from their servers anyways.
So in my opinion, the simplest way to begin sending email from our node application is to use a service
named Send Grid.
I am not affiliated with Sen Grid in any way, shape or form.
I just think it's a great service.
And I should say that they have a free plan where you don't even need to enter a credit card or anything.
So for example, if I click on pricing up here and then scroll down a bit, we can see the free plan
lets you send 40000 emails for the first month, and then after that you can still send a hundred emails
each day, free forever.
Now, for testing and educational purposes, 100 emails a day is perfect.
Now, if you do need to start sending more than 100 emails per day and you're not a big fan of SEN grids
pricing, that's OK.
I would still you send Grid just as a testing and educational platform for getting your email ready
just because it's so easy to integrate within a node environment so you can use it to set up your different
emails for different events and get your different HTML email templates ready.
And then when it comes time that you would actually need to send more than one hundred emails per day,
you can shop around on the market and find a different email solution if you want to.
Either way, I recommend signing up for a completely free centigrade account right now.
So in the top right corner, we see start for free.
Lets go ahead and click that.
OK, yes, I'm interested in this price, zero dollars per month, no credit card required, so just
go ahead and enter your username, password and email and then submit this form.
OK, this next screen is asking for a bit of information.
It's up to you how you fill this information out.
But once you've entered something into the required fields, go ahead and click.
Get started.
OK, once you're taken to your dashboard or the welcome screen, then we want to look for the settings
screen.
So as of today in the left hand side bar towards the bottom of it, we see settings.
Go ahead and click on that to expand the menu.
And then we're looking for API keys, right.
Because we want to send an email programmatically through our node server.
And as we've learned, an API is how two applications can communicate with each other.
So go ahead and click on to API keys, OK?
And then from this screen, there should be a create API key button somewhere.
Go ahead and click on that for the first field.
We just give it a name.
You could choose any name you want, but I'm going to name mine.
Complex app, email key.
I will let this API give have full access and then towards the bottom we see create and view.
Go ahead and click that.
OK, now I've blurred out the screen down here so you can't steal my API key.
I would also encourage you to be protective over your key inreality, since this is not tied to an account
with our credit card on file, it's not the end of the world if your key was leaked, but you get the
idea in general, you want to be very secretive with your API keys.
So the string of characters that you see down here is what's going to give our node application permission
to send emails on behalf of our send great account.
So right now, go ahead and select and copy that string of characters into your clipboard.
OK, now let me show you how we can leverage this key back in your text editor.
I want you to jump into your DOT EMV file.
Let's just add a new line and we could make up any name we want, but let's call it send grid.
And this is all capital letters.
Send Grid API key and then an equal sign.
And then I want you to paste in your clipboard.
Go ahead and save this file and then we can close out of it.
OK, now let's give ourselves a goal just for fun.
Let's imagine that any time a user creates a new post through our Web application, we want to send
a random test email to ourselves.
So not even to the author of the post, just to us, the owner of the site, just as an educational
experience.
So to begin working with that event of a new post being created, I would jump into our controller,
our post controller, to be specific.
So within the project folder, looking your controllers folder and then jump into post controller JS.
OK, up towards the top of this file, I would just require in the official send grid package.
So let's go out to the JavaScript grocery store or NPM and pick that up.
So in your command line, if your app is already running, just press control, see, and then type
in this command with me, npm install and the name of the package is the at symbol and then send grid
forward slash mail.
Go ahead and press enter.
OK, now that we have that package, I would tell the server to begin running again, so npm run watch.
OK, now at the top of our post controller, I would just require that package in.
So I would say consed send grid equals and then just require in and its name was at Simbel send grid
slash mail.
OK, now check this out right below this line.
We're going to use our API key to make sure that we have permission to work with our send great account.
So we just say send grid and then we look inside it and call a method named set API key just to avoid
frustration.
Notice that the P and I are lowercase.
OK, within these parentheses we just provide our API key.
So since we started in our E and V file, we would just say Process N.V. dot and then all uppercase
send grid API key.
OK, and now with this in place, sending an email could not be more intuitive.
So if we want to send an email, when someone creates a post, just find your exports create function.
So that's going to leverage our post model.
And if a new post is successfully created, then our then function will run.
So maybe right above when we see requests dot flash with the success, just add a new line right above
that and let's say send grid and then look inside it for a method named send.
Within these parentheses we just give it an object.
So curly brackets and now we just spell out a few properties.
So feel free to drop down within the curly brackets.
Let's set up a property of two so two colon and then quotes and then go ahead and type in your email
address.
Right.
So you can test to see if this actually works.
OK then a comma, let's have another property named from so from Colon and I'm just going to say test
that test dot com comma.
Let's have another property of subject colon.
So quotes and then I would say congrats on creating a new post comma.
Let's have another property named text quotes and this is the plain text.
So if someone's email program doesn't support each HTML or rich content emails, this is what they would
see.
So I just say you did a great job of creating a post comma and let's have one more property named each
HTML.
So HTML Colon and then quotes.
And this is similar to text, right.
This is going to be the body content of the email, but now we are free to use HTML in case the user's
email application supports that.
So we could say you did a and then maybe we want the word great to be bold so we could have a strong
tag inside the strong tag, include the word great and then say you did a great job of creating a post.
You get the idea, let's go ahead and save this and test it out.
So back in the Web application, go ahead and create a new post.
Quick test sample content goes here.
Go ahead and submit.
And I'm not going to show you my email inbox, but I can let you know that the email did come through
successfully.
It did take a good minute or two to come through, but that's really out of our control.
In plenty of other instances.
I've seen a single email come through within a second or two.
If after a good two or three minutes you still don't see the email, you might want to check your spam
box.
If you still don't see the email, then you might want to watch this video and make sure you didn't
miss a step.
OK, but moving on, I'm not going to set up real email events for everything in our application.
I feel like that would be a waste of time and very repetitive.
From here.
You have everything you need to do, whatever you want to do with email so you can trigger this send
grid, send method on any event in our application, you can work with our user model to return the
user email at the appropriate time.
So maybe if one user follows another user or you email the author when they create a post or when they
delete one of their posts, anything.
Also feel free to get creative with your HTML template that you send over.
For example, instead of just quotes, this can be back ticks and then you could do truly dynamic things
within your HTML template, like include the user's username or the username of who just followed them,
so on and so forth.
So feel free to take your email experience as far as you want to take it.
But for the remainder of this lesson, I'm going to show you how I would push this setup up to Hiroku.
So our first step would be to make sure that our Hiroku has the Sen grid API key.
So right now in a new browser tab, go ahead and log in to your Heroku dashboard.
In my case here I can see complex app, so I will click on that and then I will click on settings and
I'm looking for config vars so I will click reveal config vars and I would just want to add a new key
with that exact name of send.
And again, this is all uppercase send grid API key and then for the value just jump back into your
N.V. file and copy the key into your clipboard, OK.
And then just paste it into the value field and then be sure to click add.
OK, now, with that in place, all we need to do is push our latest files up to Hiroku, right?
So that's the changes we just made to our post comptroller and also our package on file that lists the
send grid package that we need.
So I would just open up my command line if your apps running press control see, let's say get add dash
uppercase A. That will stage all of your changed files, then I would say get commit lowercase M and
for the commit message inside the quotes I would say added send grid support to our create post controller.
Go ahead and press enter.
OK, so I've committed those changes to my local repository.
Now I just want to push that rebo up to Hiroku.
So that's get push Hiroku Master.
Once you've typed that in, go ahead and press enter and now Hiroku will take a minute or two, so be
patient.
I just edited out my waiting time, but once it completes, then back in your browser, go ahead and
visit your application to test it out.
So if you already have your app bookmarked, that's great.
But you can also use the Open App Link here in Hiroku Dashboard.
So now instead of localhost, I'm on my actual live application.
Let me log in and I'm just going to test out that email function.
So now that I'm logged in, I can test it up by just creating a new post.
Heroku email test.
Email is wonderful.
Go ahead and submit that cool.
And again, I'm not going to show you my inbox, but this time I only had to wait three or four seconds
before I saw it pop up in my inbox.
And that's going to bring this lesson to a close.
In our next lesson, we're going to talk about next steps, right.
Where do we go from here?
What do I recommend learning next or focusing your energy on?
I also want to include a few big picture career tips and just general words of advice.
I'm so glad you came along on this journey with me.
And in our next lesson, we're going to get a bit of perspective and see where we go from here.
Let's keep things rolling and I'll see you then.